Table 3-5. Incident Handling Checklist 
 
Action 
Completed 
Detection and Analysis 
1. 
Determine whether an incident has occurred 
1.1 
Analyze the precursors and indicators 
1.2 
Look for correlating information 
1.3 
Perform research (e.g., search engines, knowledge base) 
1.4 
As soon as the handler believes an incident has occurred, begin documenting 
the investigation and gathering evidence 
2. 
Prioritize handling the incident based on the relevant factors (functional impact, information 
impact, recoverability effort, etc.) 
3. 
Report the incident to the appropriate internal personnel and external organizations 
Containment, Eradication, and Recovery 
4. 
Acquire, preserve, secure, and document evidence 
5. 
Contain the incident 
6. 
Eradicate the incident 
6.1 
Identify and mitigate all vulnerabilities that were exploited 
6.2 
Remove malware, inappropriate materials, and other components 
6.3 
If more affected hosts are discovered (e.g., new malware infections), repeat 
the Detection and Analysis steps (1.1, 1.2) to identify all other affected hosts, then 
contain (5) and eradicate (6) the incident for them 
7. 
Recover from the incident 
7.1 
Return affected systems to an operationally ready state 
7.2 
Confirm that the affected systems are functioning normally 
7.3 
If necessary, implement additional monitoring to look for future related activity 
Post-Incident Activity 
8. 
Create a follow-up report 
9. 
Hold a lessons learned meeting (mandatory for major incidents, optional otherwise) 
Appendix A—Incident Handling Scenarios 
 
Incident handling scenarios provide an inexpensive and effective way to build incident response 
skills and identify potential issues with incident response processes. The incident response team 
or team members are presented with a scenario and a list of related questions. The team then 
discusses each question and determines the most likely answer. The goal is to determine what the 
team would really do and to compare that with policies, procedures, and generally recommended 
practices to identify discrepancies or deficiencies. For example, the answer to one question may 
indicate that the response would be delayed because the team lacks a piece of software or because 
another team does not provide off-hours support. 
The questions listed below are applicable to almost any scenario. Each question is followed by a 
reference to the related section(s) of the document. After the questions are scenarios, each of 
which is followed by additional incident-specific questions. Organizations are strongly 
encouraged to adapt these questions and scenarios for use in their own incident response 
exercises.48 
A.1 Scenario 
Questions 
Preparation: 
1. Would the organization consider this activity to be an incident? If so, which of the 
organization’s policies does this activity violate? (Section 2.1) 
2. What measures are in place to attempt to prevent this type of incident from occurring or 
to limit its impact? (Section 3.1.2) 
Detection and Analysis: 
1. What precursors of the incident, if any, might the organization detect? Would any 
precursors cause the organization to take action before the incident occurred? 
(Sections 3.2.2, 3.2.3) 
2. What indicators of the incident might the organization detect? Which indicators 
would cause someone to think that an incident might have occurred? (Sections 3.2.2, 
3.2.3) 
3. What additional tools might be needed to detect this particular incident? (Section 3.2.3) 
4. How would the incident response team analyze and validate this incident? What 
personnel would be involved in the analysis and validation process? (Section 3.2.4) 
5. To which people and groups within the organization would the team report the incident? 
(Section 3.2.7) 
6. How would the team prioritize the handling of this incident? (Section 3.2.6) 
Containment, Eradication, and Recovery: 
1. What strategy should the organization take to contain the incident? Why is this strategy 
preferable to others? (Section 3.3.1) 
2. What could happen if the incident were not contained? (Section 3.3.1) 
3. What additional tools might be needed to respond to this particular incident? 
(Sections 3.3.1, 3.3.4) 
4. Which personnel would be involved in the containment, eradication, and/or recovery 
processes? 
(Sections 3.3.1, 3.3.4) 
5. What sources of evidence, if any, should the organization acquire? How would the 
evidence be acquired? Where would it be stored? How long should it be retained? 
(Sections 3.2.5, 3.3.2, 3.4.3) 
Post-Incident Activity: 
1. Who would attend the lessons learned meeting regarding this incident? (Section 3.4.1) 
2. What could be done to prevent similar incidents from occurring in the future? (Section 3.1.2) 
3. What could be done to improve detection of similar incidents? (Section 3.1.2) 
General Questions: 
1. How many incident response team members would participate in handling this incident? 
(Section 2.4.3) 
2. Besides the incident response team, what groups within the organization would be 
involved in handling this incident? (Section 2.4.4) 
3. To which external parties would the team report the incident? When would each report 
occur? How would each report be made? What information would you report or not 
report, and why? (Section 2.3.2) 
4. What other communications with external parties may occur? (Section 2.3.2) 
5. What tools and resources would the team use in handling this incident? (Section 3.1.1) 
6. What aspects of the handling would have been different if the incident had occurred at a 
different day and time (on-hours versus off-hours)? (Section 2.4.2) 
7. What aspects of the handling would have been different if the incident had occurred at a 
different physical location (onsite versus offsite)? (Section 2.4.2) 
 
